# Phylogenetic Biology - Final Project

# Comparative Phylogeny of Viburnum

## Introduction and Goals
My project is interested in determining if there are differenes in the rate of evolution across the Viburnum phylogeny. Viburnum has ancestral H palisade cells which appear with additional arms that increase the surface area. I cells, the traditional columnar palisade cell, have evolved more than once apparently to respond to more direct light. H cells and I cells represent two specific strategies that Viburnum has adopted for light scavening with effects on the overall fitness of the plant. Previous phylogenies of Viburnum have already shown that the lineage has a history of moving out of biomes with biome-specific traits following the transition (Landis et al, 2020). Rates of molecular evolution have been attempted to be linked to life history strategies, but there has not been a consensus (Smith and Donoghue, 2008). Slower carbon accumulation in shade could result in longer generation times and slower relative rates of evolution compared to sun adapted species. Slower carbon accumulation and competition in the shade on one hand and rapid invasion into a new habitat with new anatomy on the other should result in whole plant anatomical changes. As evolution of new traits has often been recorded as occuring in a step wise manner, the evolution of new photosynthetic systems and flowering mechanics, there is a strong possibility that some of the traits involved in adapting to new habitats and new anatomy would also have evolved in a step wise manner. This process of "contingent evolution" has previously been described according to key innovation or synnovation in many plant lineages (Kriebel, 2020). However, there are contentions that it often appears as a chance event related to certain lineages already having enough standing variation and several pre-adapted traits which allow for them to capitalize on invasions or new opprotuniites. If this process is more true for viburnum, it be less likely that we see specific steps in evolution or patterns of suites of traits changing. Concretely, my project's goals are to determine if evolution rates are similar across H and I lineages and different traits, as well as if contingent step wise evolution or chance invasions are likely occuring.

## Methods
Phylogenetic Inference
Bayesian Tree Analysis: Using the mcmc_GTR.Rev script, a Bayesian tree was produced from the 173 species and 10 gene matrices. Gene matrices were uploaded to Dryad by Landis et al. Data was stored in nexus file types, which require additional work to remove individual genes from. The script was based on Michael Landis' mol_model.Rev script uploaded in a slightly edited form here. One of the other attempts is also saved in a seperate .rev file.  
Maximum Likelihood Tree: Using the ITS gene from the Viburnum data (saved as a seperate fasta file), a ML and IQTree were produced. These follow the most simplistic GTR script.

Comparative Analysis
Trait data was collected from Schmeler et al and previously collected data from the Edwards lab. 
Using the R packages mvMORPH and phytools, the output of the Bayesian analysis was was pruned and made ultrametric. Using the make.simmap function, the tree was annotated with H and I cell designations including a proposed ancestral state reconstruction. This simmap version of the tree was then used in the mvMORPH function mvOU, which applies an Orstein-Uhlenbeck process to at least two different traits. This was used on as many traits as possible, pairing traits that should share evolutionary processes to ensure reliable inferences. This output theta, alpha, and sigma for H and I cell types which represent ancestral state, selection, and drift respectively. This information would be plotted to determine which traits were evolving most quickly and whether specific traits were more closely linked to H or I cell lineages.

To consider whether specific traits aligned with lineages or if there was contingent evolution occuring, ancestral state reconstructions were performed for three sets of traits. These were traits with data for 77 species, traits with data only for H cell type species, and traits with data only for a subset of species related to hydraulics. Seperate pruned trees were created for each trait set, and the function fastAnc was used to create ancestral state reconstructions. 
Phylogenetic Independent Contrasts and Phylogenetic General Least Squares were performed on a subset of the traits to determine if there were strong relationships between them. Many of the hydraulic traits were too similar or were calculated using one another which prevented their inclusion.
Felsenstein's Threshold model was used to find correlation between traits, specifically Vein length density and palisade layer type. The settings were as follows: sample 500, number of generations 200,000, burnin .2*number of generations. 

## Results
H_I_plot is the final version of the simmap vibrunum tree including all species that had trait data available. This newer version resulted in significantly fewer changes between H and I cell types in modern species, which had important consequences for the mvMORPH analysis. Specifically, there are several more traits that had higher alpha values than layer type in the final version. These include vein length density of minor veins, leaf thickness, intercellular air space total, H cell arm length, leaf mass area, H cell arm number, tertiary vein width, xylem diameter, adaxial epidermis thickness, and relative water content at turgor loss. These range across trait types. Cell surface area and cell volume had extremely high sigma values even though their model was considered reliable. This could be related to the difficulty in measuring these traits or plasticity.
The final I/H theta ratio also changed. Previous issues with H cell type data were resolved which firmly placed them as traits which were larger ancestraly for H lineages. Traits that were above 1.25 were coded as I and traits below .75 were coded as H. Xylem area and cell volume were also larger in H lineages. Palisade surface area to volume ratio was only .82. Trichome density and palisade thickness were much larger in I lineages, and the palisade area to mesophyll area ratio, vein lenth density of minor veins, and Huber value were all at 1.25. 

The ancestral character state analyses are labeled according the their trait. Currently, there did not seem to be any contingent evolution patterns when visually comparing the trees. The only possible one would be intercellular air space predating changes in layer type and surface area to volume ratio. Given a more quantative analysis, perhaps additional information could be determined. Traits that are directly connected, like leaf thickness and adaxial thickness, see changes at the same time and place in the tree. H arm length and H arm number seem to be inversely related, such that long armed species have fewer numbers of arms.
PIC and PGLS analysis foudn the obvious significant relationship between photosynthetic max and layer type. It also found that intercellular air space and chloroplast number were not significantly related to layer type, but leaf dimensions were. Additionally, osmotic potential at full turgor and vein length density total were also significantly correlated with layer type. PGLS detected that relative water content at turgor loss was significantly correlated with photosynthesis and surface area to volume ratio but not layer type. 

The threshold coorelation test between vein length density total and layer type had a value of 0.6449364. It produced a posterior density and log likelihood plots which appear as threshold plot in plots. The posterior density plot has a long tail from 0 up to .5 and a well mixed log likelihood.
Additional tests, such as the phylomorphospace graph and PCA were also performed. The phylomorphospace indicates that there is strong clustering in trait space between photosynthetic max and surface area to volume ratio; however, there are still numerous species on the fringes. Additional phylomorphospaces were constructed to compare internal air space to layer type and surface area to volume ratio. These plots use the phylogeny branches to indicate points in space to show the historic movements through morphological space. PCAs indicated that for hydraulic traits, 1 component would be sufficient while 2 would be more effective when considering non hydraulic, non H cell, traits for which there were not NAs. 

## Discussion

While this analysis attempted to answer two difficult questions about trait evolution, only one has been characterized well so far - are certain traits evolving more quickly than others in Viburnum. After revisions made to the data supplied to mvMORPH, many traits that would be associated with layer type evolution and habit transitions were found to be highly selected for. These included traits related to the dimensions of the mesophyll, hydraulic architecture and drought survival methods, and the structure of the H cell. The theta ratio had similarly expected results in many cases. Traits that would be associated with changes in mesophyll structure and whole leaf architecture were much larger in I cell lineages. The size of palisade and density of minor veins to feed those tigher, more photosynthetically active mesophyll cells should be larger in I lineages. However, if the transition to I cells coincidenced with a transition out of the understory and into more open habitats; there would be greater need for water as stomata stay open during increased photosynthesis and drought becomes more dangerous. While stomata density had a small alpha and large sigma, vein width and area had high alphas which would have been needed to be reduced to supplement the increased minor vein area. 
Trichome density has also been an issue for researchers studying Viburnum, as there does not seem to be consistency in which lineages maintain high densities. This data indicates that there is a very large sigma and small alpha for the trait, confirming that it is disconnected from the primary selection occuring in the clade.

Considering the second question, whether contingent evolution has occured in the process of H to I transition, much less has been determined. While ancestral intercellular air space changes appear to predate changes correlated with the I cell transition, I do not have quantitative evidence. Additionally, IAStot does not correlate with layer type, indicating that if I cells are contingent upon high relative air space that it is at least two steps removed. Using the phylomorphospace plots show huge jumps in morphospace between close relatives for internal air space versus layer type and versus surface area to volume ratio. What could be leading to these changes is an interesting question, especially given the flexibility of cell structure and palisade area seen throughout the clade. The difficulty of working with plants is exemplified here as even with a large number of traits and species, it is still difficult to nearly impossible to find potential causes for transitions. Many of the traits are too closely linked to one another while others seem to be changing due to the same cause external to both of them. Likely many of these have developmental considerations in addition to selection has considered here. Viburnum leaf bud packing has important consequences for overall leaf size, shape, and hairiness which are determined in the previous season. Current conditions could be unable to offer an explanation for the set of traits examined presently. Additional traits that provide information with smaller overlap would be helpful to continue developing our understanding of the transition that Viburnum underwent, as well as further describe how this change was a whole-plant alteration with lasting impacts on all systems.


## References
Clavel, J., Escarguel, G., Merceron, G. 2015. mvMORPH: an R package for fitting multivariate evolutionary models to morphometric data. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 6(11):1311-1319. DOI: 10.1111/2041-210X.12420

Kriebel, R., Drew, B., González‐Gallegos, J., Celep, F., Heeg, L., Mahdjoub, M. and Sytsma, K., 2020. Pollinator Shifts, Contingent Evolution, And Evolutionary Constraint Drive Floral Disparity In Salvia (Lamiaceae): Evidence From Morphometrics And Phylogenetic Comparative Methods.

Michael Landis, Erika J Edwards, Michael J Donoghue, Modeling Phylogenetic Biome Shifts on a Planet with a Past, Systematic Biology, , syaa045, https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syaa045\ 

Revell, L. J. 2012. phytools: an R package for phylogenetic comparative biology (and other things). Meth. Ecol. Evol. 3:217–223. 

Schmerler Samuel B., Clement Wendy L., Beaulieu Jeremy M., Chatelet David S., Sack Lawren, Donoghue Michael J. and Edwards Erika J. 2012 Evolution of leaf form correlates with tropical–temperate transitions in Viburnum (Adoxaceae)Proc. R. Soc. B.2793905–3913 http://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2012.1110

Smith, S. and Donoghue, M., 2008. Rates of Molecular Evolution Are Linked to Life History in Flowering Plants. Science, 322(5898), pp.86-89.
